from space_packet_parser.definitions import XtcePacketDefinition

# User Documentation (Getting Started)
## Installation
This package is distributed via PyPI. To install it with pip, run:

```shell
pip install space_packet_parser
```

## Basic Usage
Usage with XTCE packet definition:

```python
from pathlib import Path
from space_packet_parser.xtce import definitions

packet_file = Path('my_packets.pkts')
xtce_document = Path('my_xtce_document.xml')
packet_definition = definitions.XtcePacketDefinition.from_document(xtce_document)

# You can introspect the packet definition to learn about what was parsed
# Look up a type (includes unit and encoding info)
pt = packet_definition.named_parameter_types["MY_PARAM_Type"]
# Look up a parameter (includes short and long descriptions)
p = packet_definition.named_parameters['MY_PARAM']
# Look up a sequence container (includes inheritance)
sc = packet_definition.named_containers['SecondaryHeaderContainer']
# See the API docs for more information about the ParameterType, Parameter, and SequenceContainer classes

with packet_file.open("rb") as binary_data:
    packet_generator = packet_definition.packet_generator(binary_data)

    for packet in packet_generator:
        # Do something with the packet data, which behaves like a dict
        print(packet['PKT_APID'])
        print(packet.header)  # subset of packet
        print(packet.user_data)  # subset of packet
```

We aim to provide examples of usage patterns. Please see the `examples` directory in the GitHub repo. If there is 
a specific example you want to see demonstrated, please open a GitHub Issue or Discussion for support.

## Packet Objects
The object returned from the `packet_generator` is a `CCSDSPacket` (unless you're yielding parsing 
exceptions for debugging). This object subclasses a python dictionary and behaves as a dictionary. To retrieve 
a parameter value from the yielded packet, you can iterate over its `items()` or you can access individual parameters 
by name. 

```python
packet = next(packet_definition.packet_generator(data))
my_param = packet["MY_PARAM_NAME"]
all_param_names = list(packet.keys())
```

## Parameter Objects

The parameter values within the packet are subclasses of normal python data types: 
`int`, `float`, `str`, `bool` and `bytes`. The objects behave exactly as the python data types except that they all 
contain a `raw_value` attribute, which contains the value generated by the data encoding parser, before being passed 
through any calibrators, enum lookups, string parsing, or boolean evaluation.

```python
print(my_param)  # prints the most derived value available - str, int, float, bytes, or bool
print(my_param.raw_value)  # prints the "raw" encoded value parsed by the low level data encoding
```

Space Packet Parser returns the following types for parameters within a packet. They behave just as their Python 
base classes (`int`, `float`, `str`, `bytes`, and `bool` respectively) except that each contains a `raw_value`
attribute that contains the encoded value before applying any calibration or other derived processing of the value.
The primary value of each parameter type is the fully parsed (calibrated, enumerated, string-parsed, etc.) value.
- `IntParameter`
- `FloatParameter`
- `StrParameter`
- `BinaryParameter`
- `BoolParameter`

### Numeric Calibration
Int and float parameters can be calibrated on the fly during decoding. These calibrators are defined on the data 
encoding XTCE element and can transform the raw encoded value to a calibrated value, e.g. via a polynomial. Calibrated 
values are always floats, even if the raw encoded value is an integer.

For example,
```xml
<xtce:IntegerDataEncoding xmlns:xtce="http://www.omg.org/space/xtce" sizeInBits="16" encoding="unsigned">
    <xtce:DefaultCalibrator>
        <xtce:PolynomialCalibrator>
            <xtce:Term exponent="1" coefficient="1.215500e-02"/>
            <xtce:Term exponent="0" coefficient="2.540000e+00"/>
        </xtce:PolynomialCalibrator>
    </xtce:DefaultCalibrator>
</xtce:IntegerDataEncoding>
```
in this encoding definition, the raw encoded value is a 16bit unsigned integer that is calibrated by a polynomial 
to produce a calibrated value, which is always a float. In this case `value = .012155 * raw_value + 2.54`.

### String Parsing
Strings are encoded as a buffer of determined size (either fixed length or dynamic based on previous parameter). The 
raw buffer includes any additional string data such as a leading size integer or a termination character. If a 
leading size or termination character is specified in the XTCE definition, the parsed string value is returned as 
the value of the parameter and the buffer is returned as the `raw_value`. If no termination character or leading size
is specified, the value and `raw_value` are the same and both refer to the raw string buffer.

For example,
```xml
<xtce:StringDataEncoding xmlns:xtce="http://www.omg.org/space/xtce">
    <xtce:Variable maxSizeInBits="32">
        <xtce:DynamicValue>
            <xtce:ParameterInstanceRef parameterRef="STR_SIZE"/>
            <xtce:LinearAdjustment intercept="27" slope="8"/>
        </xtce:DynamicValue>
        <xtce:LeadingSize sizeInBitsOfSizeTag="3"/>
    </xtce:Variable>
</xtce:StringDataEncoding>
```
in this encoding definition, the size of the raw string buffer (number of bytes in the packet) is defined by a 
parameter named `STR_SIZE`. The value stored in `STR_SIZE` is given in number of bytes so it is multiplied by 8 and a
constant base length of 27 bits is added to the final buffer size. So if `STR_SIZE` encodes the value 4, the raw string
buffer width in the packet is 59bits. This is an odd size for a string because it is not an integer number of bytes 
but that's because it includes a 3bit unsigned int in front of the string data that specifies the size of the string, 
in bits, making the raw string `[3 bit uint | 7 bytes]`

In this case, the `raw_value` of the parameter will contain the full string buffer as an 8 byte string, 
padded on the RHS with 5 zero bits. We have to pad it because you cannot create a byte string from a non-integer 
number of bytes (59bits). The `value` of the parameter will contain the fully parsed `str` object based on the value 
of the leading size. If the leading size uint3 represents the integer 4, the `value` of the parameter will be a `str` 
that is made of the first 4 bytes of data in the raw buffer following the leading size.

Termination characters work similarly.
```xml
<xtce:StringDataEncoding encoding="UTF-16BE" xmlns:xtce="http://www.omg.org/space/xtce">
    <xtce:SizeInBits>
        <xtce:Fixed>
            <xtce:FixedValue>32</xtce:FixedValue>
        </xtce:Fixed>
        <xtce:TerminationChar>0058</xtce:TerminationChar>
    </xtce:SizeInBits>
</xtce:StringDataEncoding>
```
In this case, the raw buffer is a fixed length (32bits). 
The parsed `StrParameter.raw_value` will be the full string buffer, including the termination 
character and any additional following bytes. The `value` of the parameter will be a `str` based on all the encoded 
bytes preceding the termination character. In this case, the raw string buffer _will_ always be an integer number of 
bytes since a termination character is always an integer number of bytes, so no padding of the raw value is required.

### Enumerated Lookups
Enums are defined by lookup tables in the XTCE, which are converted to dictionaries internally. Once the raw value 
from the data encoding is parsed, a lookup is made to the lookup table and the final string label is returned. 
Note that the final label from enumerated lookups is always a string. The raw value used in the lookup table is 
interpreted based on the data encoding for the parameter. Integer encoded enum values are ints, float encoded values 
are floats, and string encoded values are used as the raw string buffer from the encoding.

Only raw values may be used for enum lookups. 
Calibrated numeric values cannot be used for enum lookups from numeric encodings. For string encoded parameters, 
only raw string buffers may be used for lookups (not fully parsed strings).

For example,
```xml
<xtce:EnumeratedParameterType xmlns:xtce="http://www.omg.org/space/xtce" name="TEST_ENUM_Type">
    <xtce:UnitSet/>
    <xtce:IntegerDataEncoding sizeInBits="8" encoding="unsigned"/>
    <xtce:EnumerationList>
        <xtce:Enumeration label="OP_LOW" value="0"/>
        <xtce:Enumeration label="OP_HIGH" value="7"/>
    </xtce:EnumerationList>
</xtce:EnumeratedParameterType>
```
the encoded value (`raw_value`) is a uint8 integer but the value returned for an enumerated parameter type will 
be a `StrParameter` containing the label string associated with the integer value.

### Boolean Evaluation
Booleans behave nicely for integers and floats where zero is False and everything else is True. For string and binary
encoded values, the only falsy value is an empty string, which is kind of silly to encode. XTCE is not specific on the 
interpretation of string and binary encoded values for boolean parameters and there is no generally accepted 
interpretation, so we default to Python's `bool`, which interprets any non-empty string as True. 

Only raw values may be used for boolean evaluation. Calibrated values are not considered.

For example,
```xml
<xtce:BooleanParameterType xmlns:xtce="http://www.omg.org/space/xtce" name="TEST_PARAM_Type">
    <xtce:UnitSet>
        <xtce:Unit>smoot</xtce:Unit>
    </xtce:UnitSet>
    <xtce:IntegerDataEncoding encoding="unsigned" sizeInBits="1"/>
</xtce:BooleanParameterType>
```
the encoded value (`raw_value`) is a single bit interpreted as an integer but the value returned for a boolean 
parameter type will be a `BoolParameter`, evaluated over the encoded integer value. `False` if the integer is 0, 
`True` otherwise.

## Parsing from a Socket
The input data object to `XtcePacketDefinition.packet_generator` need only be a binary filelike object from which 
bytes can be read. This means the packet generator is not limited to parsing data from files! In an effort to support
development of quicklook type tools, we provide an example of parsing data streaming through a socket in 
`parsing_and_plotting_idex_waveforms_from_socket.py`. 

The example mocks the behavior of an instrument sending packet data asynchronously 
through a socket in chunks of inconsistent size. The packet parser reads bytes from the receiver side of the socket 
and will read data repeatedly until there is sufficient data for the full packet. Once it has a full packet 
(as determined by the packet length in the CCSDS header), it cranks the generator and yields a parsed packet. 

You'll notice that the example ends with a timeout error. This timeout can be controlled when creating the socket 
connection with `receiver.settimeout(timeout_seconds)`.

## Variable Length Packet Fields of Explicit Length
Flight software engineers often need to downlink data (usually binary blobs) of variable length. The length of these 
fields is often specified in a _previous_ telemetry point in the same packet, and you have to fetch 
the length by referencing that previous field. 

### Explicit Variable Length Example
Suppose the variable length field is called `SCI_DATA` and is a binary blob (e.g. of compressed data).
The length of this field is specified earlier in the packet in a field called `SCI_DATA_BYTELEN`, specified in
number of bytes. To define the type for `SCI_DATA` in XTCE, you could use the following (snippet):

```xml
<xtce:BinaryParameterType>
    <xtce:BinaryDataEncoding>
        <xtce:SizeInBits>
            <xtce:DynamicValue>
                <xtce:ParameterInstanceRef parameterRef="SCI_DATA_BYTELEN" useCalibratedValue="false"/>
                <xtce:LinearAdjustment intercept="0" slope="8"/>
            </xtce:DynamicValue>
        </xtce:SizeInBits>
    </xtce:BinaryDataEncoding>
</xtce:BinaryParameterType>
```

This tells the parser that the size in bits of data type `SCI_DATA_Type` (the type of `SCI_DATA`) is the raw value 
encoded in the parameter `SCI_DATA_BYTELEN`, multiplied by 8 (to convert number of bytes to number of bits).

## Variable Length Packet Fields of Implicit Length
In some circumstances, flight software teams define a packet field that simply fills up the "remaining space" in the 
packet. The length of this field is usually implicit but can be computed by subtracting the combined length of all 
fixed length fields in the packet from the total length of the packet specified in the CCSDS header.

The `PKT_LEN` field is the length of the packet user data, in bytes. This field: 
- counts from zero
- does not include the header data (always 6 bytes)

Thus, you can determine the length of your field dynamically from the packet length in the CCSDS header:

$$len_{var} = 8 \times (len_{packet} + 1) - \sum_n len_{fixed,n}$$

where 
- $len_{var}$ is the length, in bits, of the variable length field
- $len_{packet}$ is the packet user data length in bytes (from the CCSDS header)
- $\sum_n len_{fixed,n}$ is the combined length of all fixed length fields in the packet user data

There are some limitations to this. If your FSW team is violating these limitations, they are making your life 
extremely difficult, and you have my condolences.
- You can only have a _single_ "remaining packet length" field in a given packet definition. Encoding more than one 
  such field makes it impossible to determine the length of the fields.
- All other fields in the packet _must_ be fixed length. There is no way that I know of in XTCE to calculate a 
  dynamic length that is an arbitrary function of multiple previous length specifier fields.

### Implicit Variable Length Example
Packet Definition:
```text 
"VERSION" : 3 bits  
"TYPE" : 1 bits  
"SEC_HDR_FLG" : 1 bits  
"PKT_APID" : 11 bits  
"SEQ_FLGS" : 2 bits  
"SRC_SEQ_CTR" : 14 bits  
"PKT_LEN" : 16 bits  
"SHCOARSE" : 32 bits  
"SID" : 8 bits  
"SPIN" : 8 bits  
"ABORTFLAG" : 1 bits  
"STARTDELAY" : 15 bits  
"COUNT" : 8 bits  
"EVENTDATA": variable length
```

To calculate the length of `EVENTDATA`:

```{math}
len_{var} &= 8 \times (len_{packet} + 1) - (&&len_{SHCOARSE} + len_{SID} + len_{SPIN} + \\
          &                                 &&len_{ABORTFLAG} + len_{STARTDELAY} + len_{COUNT})\\
          &= 8 \times (len_{packet} + 1) - (&&32 + 8 + 8 + 1 + 15 + 8)\\
          &= 8 \times len_{packet} - 64     &&
```

This equation can be implemented in XTCE by referencing the packet length field as follows:

```xml
<xtce:BinaryParameterType name="EVENTDATA_Type" >
    <xtce:BinaryDataEncoding>
        <xtce:SizeInBits>
            <xtce:DynamicValue>
                <xtce:ParameterInstanceRef parameterRef="PKT_LEN"/>
                <xtce:LinearAdjustment intercept="-64" slope="8"/>
            </xtce:DynamicValue>
        </xtce:SizeInBits>
    </xtce:BinaryDataEncoding>
</xtce:BinaryParameterType>
```

## Troubleshooting Packet Parsing
Parsing binary packets is error-prone and getting the XTCE definition correct can be a challenge at first. 
Most flight software teams can export XTCE from their command and telemetry database but these exports usually require 
some fine-tuning. 

`UnrecognizedPacketError`s are raised during parsing of an individual packet when either:

- a) multiple child containers are valid inheritors of the current sequence container based on 
   restriction criteria evaluated against the data parsed so far
- b) no child containers are valid inheritors of the current sequence container based on 
  restriction criteria evaluated against the data parsed so far 
  and the current container is abstract

To aid you during development, `UnrecognizedPacketError` exceptions generated during parsing can be returned 
alongside any valid packet objects by setting `yield_unrecognized_packet_errors=True`. 
These exception objects are not raised so that the generator may keep parsing. Instead, they 
are yielded from the generator with a `partial_data` attribute for user examination. This partial data allows you to 
see how far it got through a container inheritance structure before failing to determine the rest of the structure. 

## Common Issues and Solutions
### Parser Generator Completes without Yielding a Packet
This can occur if your data file contains only packets that do not match any packet definitions in your XTCE document 
and `yield_unrecognized_packet_errors=False` (the default). This could mean that your data file actually contains only 
APIDs that are not covered in your packet definition, but usually it means you have incorrectly defined 
restriction criteria for SequenceContainer inheritance.

For example a restriction criteria element that requires an APID which does not exist in the data.
```xml
<xtce:RestrictionCriteria>
    <xtce:Comparison parameterRef="PKT_APID" value="-99" useCalibratedValue="false"/>
</xtce:RestrictionCriteria>
```

### Only Packet Headers are Parsed
If you observe that only packet headers are being parsed but no exceptions are being raised (you may be seeing a 
lot of length mismatch warnings if you have logging set up), it likely means that 
you have forgotten to set `abstract="true"` on your non-concrete sequence container elements.

For example
```xml
<xtce:SequenceContainer name="CCSDSPacket">
    <xtce:LongDescription>Super-container for telemetry and command packets</xtce:LongDescription>
    <xtce:EntryList>
        <xtce:ParameterRefEntry parameterRef="VERSION"/>
        <xtce:ParameterRefEntry parameterRef="TYPE"/>
    </xtce:EntryList>
</xtce:SequenceContainer>
```
will parse as a complete packet, containing only `VERSION` and `TYPE` instead of searching for inheriting sequence 
containers. To define the container as abstract, change the first element opening tag to
```xml
<xtce:SequenceContainer name="CCSDSPacket" abstract="true">
...contents
</xtce:SequenceContainer>
```

## Optimizing for Performance
The logic evaluated during packet parsing is largely reflective of the XTCE configuration being used 
to define packet structures. The more logic in the XTCE, the more logic must be evaluated during 
parsing. Below are some common ways to reduce complexity and speed up parsing:

1. **Remove `RestrictionCriteria` Elements:** If your packet stream is a single packet structure, 
    there is no reason to require the evaluation of a restriction criteria for each packet. 
2. **Remove Unnecessary Packet Definitions:** Even in a packet stream with multiple packet formats, if you only
    care about one packet type, you can remove the definitions for the other. By default, the packet `Parser` will 
    catch unrecognized packet errors and skip to the next packet. This skips the parsing of packets 
    for which a valid definition cannot be determined.
3. **Reduce Container Inheritance:** A flat container definition structure will evaluate restriction criteria
    faster than a nested structure. Each instance of nesting requires an additional `MatchCriteria.evaluate()`
    call for each packet being parsed. 
4. **Reduce Complex Items:** Parameter type definitions that contain calibrators or complex string parsing 
    (especially variable length termination character defined strings) add significant evaluation logic to 
    the parsing of each parameter, as does any parameter type that is variable length. 
    Removing them can speed up parsing.
